[TEP-0044] Update Alternatives (#586)
tektoncd/community: teps/0044-data-locality-and-pod-overhead-in-pipelines.md

    (and [Conditions](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/pipelines.md#guard-task-execution-using-conditions))
  * [Finally tasks](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/pipelines.md#adding-finally-to-the-pipeline)
  * [Allowing step failure](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/tasks.md#specifying-onerror-for-a-step)
* Functionality that would require significantly expanded orchestration logic:
  * [Custom tasks](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/pipelines.md#using-custom-tasks) - the pod would
    need to be able to create and watch Custom Tasks, or somehow lean on the Pipelines controller to do this
* Functionality that might not be possible (i.e. constrained by pods themselves):
  * Any dynamically created TaskRuns. This is discussed in more detail [below](#dynamically-created-tasks-in-pipelines).
  * Running each Task with a different `ServiceAccount` - the pod has one ServiceAccount as a whole

(See also [functionality supported by experimental Pipeline to TaskRun](https://github.com/tektoncd/experimental/tree/main/pipeline-to-taskrun#supported-pipeline-features))

> ### Dynamically created Tasks in Pipelines
> Currently, the number of Tasks in a Pipeline is determined at authoring time based on the number of items in a Pipeline's `Tasks` field.
> However, [TEP-0090: Matrix](./0090-matrix.md) proposes a feature that would allow additional Tasks to be created at runtime.

Reviewer: nit: the number of tasks would stay the same, what changes is the number of taskruns

```suggestion
### Dynamically created TaskRuns in Pipelines
Currently, the number of TaskRuns created from a Pipeline is determined at authoring time based on the number of items in a Pipeline's `Tasks` field.
However, [TEP-0090: Matrix](./0090-matrix.md) proposes a feature that would allow additional TaskRuns to be created when a `Pipeline` is executed.
```

## Requirements

1. Tasks can be composed and run together:
  - Must be able to share data without requiring a volume external to the pod
  - Must be possible to run multiple Tasks as one pod
1. It should be possible to have Tasks that run even if others fail; i.e. the Task
  can be run on the same pod as another Task that fails
  - This is to support use cases such as uploading test results, even if the test Task failed

>   - This requirement is being included because we could choose a solution that doesn't address the above use case.

Author: I'm not completely sure what you mean by this. This requirement is currently addressed in pipelines with `finally`, but the required use of a PVC causes us to run into the problems described in the problem statement. If we chose a solution where you could run the pipeline's `tasks` in a pod but not its `finally` tasks, that wouldn't address this requirement also due to the required PVC.

>   - This requirement is being included because we could choose a solution that doesn't address the above use case.

Reviewer: @lbernick - I think what @afrittoli is referring to is that `Results` from failed `Tasks` are not available to any other `Tasks`, so the test "results" have to be in a PVC (they are not `Results` as defined in Tekton Pipelines) - see related issue in https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/issues/3749

>   - This requirement is being included because we could choose a solution that doesn't address the above use case.

Author: oh I see, thanks!

> 1. Any configuration for the execution of a Pipeline must be modifiable at runtime.

Reviewer 2: I'm missing some background here - what's the use case for modifying the execution config in a PipelineRun vs a Pipeline?

Author: it's very likely we will want a configuration option here on the Pipeline; I think this is probably something we should implement. The reason to allow people to specify this on a PipelineRun is generally because the choice of how to execute a Pipeline is a runtime level concern. Specifically, I can imagine situations where you might have different approaches to PVCs in different clusters but want to reuse the same Pipeline definition from a repo, or maybe some PipelineRuns will use different amounts of data than other PipelineRuns for the same Pipeline and you want to sometimes distribute the work to different pods and sometimes not. Basically-- I think we shouldn't lock ourselves into a solution that can only be specified at one of runtime or authoring time. (Perhaps this should read "must be modifiable at both runtime and authoring time, but the initial implementation will be runtime based"? This is the question I tried to address with #610.)

Reviewer 2: That helps, thanks. I agree that we shouldn't lock ourselves into a solution that cannot be extended. 
The reason I was asking about having the config in a pipeline is that pipeline resources are specified in a pipeline/task spec. So, for the specific use case of replacing pipeline resources though (e.g. a git resource in a TaskRun), the decision of using a single pod/no PVCs was made by the task/pipeline author. 
It seems like the scope of this TEP is greater than just replacing the pipeline resources use case though it might make sense to do this at the Run

  - We may explore adding authoring time configuration in the future after gathering feedback on runtime configuration.
1. It must be possible for colocated Tasks to be able to specify different levels of [hermeticity](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0025-hermekton.md)
  - For example, a Task that fetches dependencies may need to run in non-hermetic mode, but the Task that actually
    builds an artifact using these dependencies may need to be hermetic.
  - Hermetic Pipelines and Tasks will be run in their own network namespaces with no networking enabled.

>     The solution must provide a way for some colocated Tasks to run in isolated network namespaces, and some to have network access.

Author: yup! there's more detail on use cases for different levels of hermeticity in a pipeline in TEP 25.

1. The `status` of each TaskRun should be displayed separately to the user in the PipelineRun `status`.
    - [PipelineRuns currently specify this information in a `taskruns` section ](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/pipelineruns.md#monitoring-execution-status)
      so if the execution method ends up not being individual `TaskRuns` we may need to either create "fake" taskruns

>       to populate, or create a new section with different status information.

Author: agreed, added to requirements.

and supporting this feature in a pod might require entrypoint changes.
Some functionality blurs the line between Pipeline functionality and functionality of just a group of Tasks
(for example, considering just the Pipeline's "Tasks" field and not its "Finally" field),
like the ability to run Tasks in parallel and pass results between them.

The following list details how pod constraints affect Pipeline features. Deciding what design to implement will require deciding
which of these features are in and out of scope and what level of abstraction is most appropriate for handling them.

### Pipeline functionality supported in pods
Currently, the TaskRun controller creates one pod per TaskRun, with one container per Step. Pod containers run in parallel, but the entrypoint
binary run in the pod ensures that each Step waits for the previous one to finish by writing Step metadata to a pod volume and having
each container wait until a previous Step's results are available to begin executing.

Some functionality required to run multiple Tasks in a pod could be supported with existing pod construction and entrypoint code;

> some functionality would require changes to this code, and some functionality may not be possible at all.

Author: thanks @bobcatfish, this list was 99% you!

    * [isolated](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/workspaces.md#isolating-workspaces-to-specific-steps-or-sidecars)
  * Specifying Tasks in a Pipeline via [Bundles](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/tekton-bundle-contracts.md)
    (all bundles would have to be fetched before execution starts)
  * [step templates](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/tasks.md#specifying-a-step-template)
  * [timeout](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/pipelines.md#configuring-the-failure-timeout)
* Functionality that could be supported with updated pod construction logic:
  * [Step resource requirements](https://tekton.dev/docs/pipelines/tasks/#defining-steps)
    * Any solution that runs multiple Tasks in one pod will need to determine how container resource requirements
    should be set based on the resource requirements of each Task.
  * [Sidecars](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/tasks.md#specifying-sidecars)
    * We may need to wrap sidecar commands such that sidecars don't start executing until their corresponding Task starts

>     * We will also need to handle the case where multiple Tasks define sidecars with the same name

Author: agreed! I suspect for an initial version of this tep we may want to hold off on sidecars, and see if it's a feature users want in this context (and if they would want "normal" sidecars or "pipeline-level" sidecars).

### Dynamically created Tasks in Pipelines
Currently, the number of Tasks in a Pipeline is determined at authoring time based on the number of items in a Pipeline's `Tasks` field.
However, [TEP-0090: Matrix](./0090-matrix.md) proposes a feature that would allow additional Tasks to be created at runtime.
In summary, a Pipeline may need to run a Task multiple times with different parameters. The parameters "fanned out" to a Task run
multiple times in parallel may be specified at authoring time, or they may come from an earlier Task. For example, a Pipeline might clone a repo,
read a set of parameters from the repo, and run a build or test task once for each of these parameters.

A controller responsible for running multiple Tasks in one pod must know how many Tasks will be run before creating the pod.
This is because a pod will start executing once it has been created, and many of the fields (including the containers list)
[cannot be updated](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.19/#podspec-v1-core).
However, the number of Tasks needed may not be known until the previous Task is run and its outputs are retrieved.

> Therefore, we may not be able to support running a Pipeline with a matrix of parameters in one pod, or other forms of dynamic Task creation.

Author: you're right; clarified the text here.

### Additional Design Considerations
- Executing an entire Pipeline in a pod, as compared to executing multiple Tasks in a pod, may pave the way for supporting
[local execution](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/issues/235).

## Design proposal

TBD - currently focusing on enumerating and examining alternatives before selecting one or more ways forward.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 3: NIT: I wonder if it would help building some kind of matrix of the various options.
Not all pros/cons/supported functionality would fit in the matrix, but it might help us visualise the data?
Not something for this PR in any case, maybe something we can build collaboratively or so.

Also it might make sense to identify if all options are orthogonal or if any of the options could make sense to live together.

Author: good idea, I can put together some sort of doc, but agreed that it's not for this PR.

  (Pipelines)
* Pipelines already have syntax for expressing some of the features we'd likely want for this functionality, e.g.
  `finally`

Cons:
* Using an existing abstraction (Pipelines) could be confusing if we can't support all of a Pipeline's functionality
  when running as a pod (which is likely)
* Need to determine a mechanism for surfacing results of individual Tasks

### Pipeline executed as a TaskRun

This is the approach currently taken in the
[Pipeline to TaskRun experimental custom task](https://github.com/tektoncd/experimental/tree/main/pipeline-to-taskrun).
In this approach, a CustomTask turns a PipelineRun into a TaskRun, and the TaskRun controller executes this TaskRun in a pod.

Pros:
* Permits reuse of existing CRDs with less re-architecting than having the PipelineRun controller run a PipelineRun in a pod.

Cons:
* We would be [limited in the features we could support](https://github.com/tektoncd/experimental/tree/main/pipeline-to-taskrun#supported-pipeline-features)
  to features that TaskRuns already support, or we'd have to add more Pipeline features to TaskRuns.

> * Does not surface results of Pipeline Tasks separately.

Reviewer 3: I think one cons of this is approach is also that it breaks the `Task` -> `TaskRun` 1:1 relationship. 
With some extra complexity, it would be possible however to create extra `TaskRuns` and have the controller populate status and results on them.

Author: agreed, noted here

Pros:
* Doesn't require any changes for Pipeline or Task authors
* Allows execution related concerns to be determined at runtime

Cons:
* Will need to update our entrypoint logic to allow for steps running in parallel
* Doesn't give as much flexibility as being explicit
  * This functionality might not even be desirable for folks who want to make use of multiple nodes
    * We could mitigate this by adding more configuration, e.g. opt in or out at a Pipeline level, but could get
      complicated if people want more control (e.g. opting in for one workspace but not another)

> * Removes ability to run Tasks on separate pods if data is shared between them.

Reviewer 3: If the reason for separate pods is security, using different service accounts would force separate pods anyways.
If the reason for separate pods is resources, having high resource requirements could enforce sequential execution of the use of separate Pods.
Alternatively this could be overcome by some kind of "anti-affinity" between `PipelineTasks`.
This gets scarily close to the scheduling domain though - which means there may be more complexity behind this than it appears on the surface.

Author: That's a great point. I think the reason is resources, not security, and so choosing this option would essentially be trading one resource-related problem for another.

```

Pros:
* Allows user to configure decisions about scheduling at runtime without changing the Pod

Cons:
* If it's important for a Pipeline to be executed in a certain way, that information will have to be encoded somewhere
  other than the Pipeline 
* For very large Pipelines, this default behavior may cause problems (e.g. if the Pipeline is too large to be scheduled
  into one pod)
* Compared to the ["task group"](#add-grouping-to-tasks-in-a-pipeline-or-pipelinerun) solution, this solution provides similar functionality
but lends itself less well to adding authoring time configuration later. 

### Controller option to execute Pipelines in a pod

In this option, the Tekton controller can be configured to always execute Pipelines inside one pod.
This would require similar functionality to the [pipeline in a pod](#pipeline-in-a-pod-plus-pipelines-in-pipelines),
but provide less flexibility to Task and Pipeline authors, as only cluster administrators will be able to control scheduling.

> ### Allow Tasks to contain other Tasks

Reviewer 3: NIT: perhaps the title could be different from the other one?

and a pod with one container per TaskRun. The TaskGroup would store references to any TaskRuns created, and Task statuses would be stored on the TaskRuns.

Pros:
* Creating a single TaskRun for each Task would allow individual Task statuses to be surfaced separately.
* Allows us to choose which Pipeline features to support, and marks a clear distinction for users between supported and unsupported features.
* Having the Pipeline controller create TaskRuns up front (as "pending" or similar) might have other benefits, for
  example we've struggled in the past with how to represent the status of Tasks in a Pipeline which don't have a
  backing TaskRun, e.g. they are skipped or cancelled. Now there actually would be a TaskRun backing them.

Cons:
* Unclear benefit compared to adding a grouping syntax within a Pipeline and letting the PipelineRun controller handle scheduling
* We would likely end up supporting features like `finally` for both Pipelines and TaskGroups
(and generally reusing a lot of the PipelineRun controller's code in the TaskGroup controller)
* Must create all TaskRuns in advance
* New CRD to contend with

> * Extra complexity for Task/Pipeline authors

Reviewer: also [reusability design principle](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/design-principles.md#reusability): "existing features should be reused when possible instead of adding new ones"

at runtime how to schedule each TaskRun. For example, it could create a pod and schedule all the TaskRuns on it,
or, if a single pod running all the Tasks is too large to be scheduled, it could split the TaskRuns between multiple pods.
The controller would be responsible for reconciling both the TaskGroup and the TaskRuns created from the TaskGroup.
We could introduce configuration options to specify whether the controller should attempt to split up TaskRuns
or simply fail if a single pod wouldn't be schedulable. 

The controller would need to determine how many TaskRuns are needed when the TaskGroup is first reconciled, due to
[limitations associated with dynamically creating Tasks](#dynamically-created-tasks-in-pipelines).
When the TaskGroup is first reconciled, it would create all TaskRuns needed, with those that are not ready to execute marked as "pending",
and a pod with one container per TaskRun. The TaskGroup would store references to any TaskRuns created, and Task results would be stored on the TaskRuns.

Pros:
* Creating a single TaskRun for each Task would allow individual Task results to be surfaced separately.

> * Allows us to choose which Pipeline features to support.

Reviewer 3: I think this is one of the nice pros - since it marks a clear distinction for users.

Author: noted in the PR!

* Having the Pipeline controller create TaskRuns up front (as "pending" or similar) might have other benefits, for
  example we've struggled in the past with how to represent the status of Tasks in a Pipeline which don't have a
  backing TaskRun, e.g. they are skipped or cancelled. Now there actually would be a TaskRun backing them.

> Cons:

Reviewer 3: Extra complexity for users / authors.
Grouping decision made at authoring time only
